Building a Monetization Engine
We started with in-app purchases, but there wasn’t
much to “buy” except a Streak Freeze. Advertising
was also capped. We found that we could show one
ad after each lesson without affecting user retention,
but more than that would drive people away.
It became clear that introducing a freemium
subscription product was the best opportunity to
scale the business. The hard part was doing so while
still offering an excellent product for those who
couldn’t pay. We landed on a subscription package
that eliminated ads and gave learners unlimited
hearts. Both of these features remove friction from
the app. Over the years, we’ve continued to tweak this
model, but the core dynamic is the same: the paid
product gives us the resources to pursue our mission
at the greatest scale, and the free product is largely
how that mission is achieved.
Plenty of investors—and even some of us at Duolingo
—wondered whether offering such a great free
product would provide too little incentive for learners
to subscribe. There will likely always be a tension
between accessibility and revenue. But over time, our
approach to monetization has shown that we can
strike this balance, achieving long-term loyalty while
building a large business.
A 100-Year Brand
Through steady growth and clever marketing, we’ve made
Duolingo a household name. Even people who’ve never used the
app are familiar with our mascot, the delightful—if sometimes
unhinged—Duo. We’ve invested a ton in Duo’s journey, along
with the rest of our characters and the world they inhabit. This
says a lot about our ambitions. We’re not just trying to help
people get better at French. We want to build a brand and set of
characters that become a part of people’s lives, turning everyone
in the world into daily learners.

Characters Count Investing in Marketing
Our characters make learning fun. Built from simple geometric
shapes, each has a distinct personality and story. Together, they
reflect the diversity of our learners and bring a sense of humor
and play to the app.
But these characters—inspired more by brands like Nintendo
than traditional learning companies—also serve an important
strategic purpose. We see this IP as a crucial moat for our
business, especially in the era of AI learning tools. That same
emotional connection that makes learning enjoyable also makes
our product stickier over time. Even if someone cloned our
entire app, learners would still come back to Duolingo for the
characters.
At Duolingo, we’ve grown by creating a product that people
genuinely love—and love to talk about. But we’ve also figured
out how to use other levers, like performance marketing, to
complement that organic growth. Our paid ads exist to amplify
our word-of-mouth momentum, not replace it, so we are
conservative with our spend. This allows us to invest in standout
campaigns and reactive social moments that set us apart.
Our marketing team excels at creating high-impact content at a
low cost. Thanks to their work, Duo has walked the red carpet at
the Barbie premiere, hosted a (fake) dating reality show on the
streaming service Peacock, and become an international social
media star. These moments reflect the playful, irreverent energy
of our brand and show how a thoughtful balance of organic
growth and marketing can create meaningful impact.
The Path
Originally, learners navigated Duolingo through the Tree, which
consisted of skills (e.g., going to a restaurant). Each skill began
with basic word meanings and progressed to harder content, but
learners only needed to complete the first level to move on. While
this flexibility let them advance quickly, it often led to frustration
when harder concepts came along and exposed gaps in their
foundational knowledge.
In 2022, we took a leap: replacing the Tree with the Path. This
new linear structure requires learners to complete every lesson
in sequence, ensuring a consistent and strong foundation
for everyone. The Path was a large undertaking across both
engineering and design. We anticipated that learners might
resist such a dramatic change to their routine. And even though
the data didn’t immediately show improvements in core metrics
like DAUs or monetization, the switch was the right decision.
It prioritized real mastery over speedrunning easy lessons to
maintain streaks. It also gave us clearer insights into learner
progress and greater control over the learning experience.
Sometimes taking the long view means making bold moves that
might seem counterproductive in the moment. The Path was just
that. It fundamentally changed how people learn with Duolingo
and has been essential to our success.
22

Excellence isn’t some
lofty goal—it’s our
baseline.
The expectation is that we’ll do the best work of our
careers here, constantly pushing our craft and ideas
to meet our bar and then exceed it.
Still, we’re human, and we’re going to make mistakes.
When that happens, we don’t chase blame. We dig
in and figure out what happened. This is how we
continuously raise the bar—not by being perfect, but
by being a little bit better each day.
Culture of Excellence
Our bar for quality was set at the top and at the beginning. Luis,
Severin, and the early team share a nearly ridiculous attention
to detail. (Luis is the rare CEO who still reports every bug he
finds in the app.) But it’s no longer just about leadership or
any individual Duo. As the company has grown, we’ve worked
together to define clear standards for excellence and scale them
across the organization.
Taking Ownership
Hard on the Work, Easy on the People
One key to maintaining high standards is assigning ownership.
That means putting a person or team on a task, providing a clear
mandate and saying, “You are responsible.” We’ve seen it again
and again: only things that are owned become excellent.
As we grow, unclear ownership can become a challenge. One
task might stretch across four functions and seven teams, and
it’s not clear who owns what. There will always be some projects
where defining ownership is tricky, or impossible. But the most
important projects at the company should have an owner.
Our culture is famously warm and friendly. And that’s great!
But a warm-and-fuzzy culture can make it hard to have tough
conversations. We’ve always been clear when giving feedback
on design and product, but we want to be more candid in other
areas, too.
26

The Bar for Hiring
Our people set the bar for everything else we do.
So, we insist on bringing in exceptional talent—
individuals who stand out not just in their skills but in
their character. That might mean someone who was
at the top of their class, or the first from their family
to graduate from college—but also is genuinely kind.
To maintain this standard, Luis and Severin still
approve every new hire.
We don’t lower this bar for anyone. For example, we
once passed on a senior executive for a role we had
been trying to fill for over a year because they weren’t
kind. They aced their interviews and had a strong
resume but were disrespectful to the driver who
picked them up from the airport. That single moment
told us what we needed to know. Excellence isn’t just
what you do—it’s how you treat others.
V1s Not MVPs
The idea of shipping unfinished features, or Minimum Viable
Products (MVPs), is common across tech. But MVPs come with a
specific set of expectations—and limitations.
At Duolingo, we don’t do MVPs—we do V1s.
The difference is important: MVPs often have a lower standard
of quality and can be used as an excuse to ship subpar work. V1s,
on the other hand, are polished. They may not have all the bells
and whistles, but they meet our bar. Sometimes this approach
takes a little longer, but we refuse to compromise our users’
experience by showing them half-baked ideas.
30